5c basic information gathering (#1602)
OWASP/owasp-mstg: Document/0x05c-Reverse-Engineering-and-Tampering.md

$ objection explore
```

#### Basic Information Gathering

As mentioned previously, Android runs on top of a modified Linux kernel. Android retains the [proc filesystem](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/filesystems/proc.txt "procfs") from Linux, and this filesystem is mounted at /proc.  The proc filesystem (procfs) provides a directory-based view of process running on the system, providing information about the processes, threads, and other system-wide diagnostics. Procfs is arguably one of the most important filesystems on Android. Many Android tools depend on procfs as the source of information.

> Many command line tools are not shipped with the Android firmware to reduce the size, but can be easily installed on a rooted device using BusyBox. We can also create our own custom scripts using commands like `cut`, `grep`, `sort` etc, to parse the proc filesystem information.

Author: There is a reference here https://github.com/OWASP/owasp-mstg/blob/master/Document/0x05b-Basic-Security_Testing.md#xposed in the listing. It is not the most direct one, may be the tooling part can be updated for busybox?

> Many command line tools are not shipped with the Android firmware to reduce the size, but can be easily installed on a rooted device using BusyBox. We can also create our own custom scripts using commands like `cut`, `grep`, `sort` etc, to parse the proc filesystem information.

Reviewer: I think that's a great idea. Having busybox on Android is very helpful and it should be among the standard tools on our Tools section I'd say. I'll create a ticket for that and if you have time you can gladly take over it :)

> Many command line tools are not shipped with the Android firmware to reduce the size, but can be easily installed on a rooted device using BusyBox. We can also create our own custom scripts using commands like `cut`, `grep`, `sort` etc, to parse the proc filesystem information.

Author: Sure, I will take up the ticket, should be a quick one :)

In this section we will be using information from the proc filesystem directly or indirectly to gather information about a running process.

##### Open Files

> `lsof` can provide a list of all open files, including a stream, a network file or a regular file. When invoking the `lsof` command without any option it will list all open files belonging to all active processes on the system, while when invoking with the flag `-p <pid>`, it returns the list of open files for the specified process. The [man page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/lsof.8.html "Man Page of lsof") shows various other options in detail.

Reviewer: What about this concise version? In our case we'll be only using that one option, for more they can look it up in the man.
```suggestion
You can use `lsof` with the flag `-p <pid>` to return the list of open files for the specified process. See the [man page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/lsof.8.html "Man Page of lsof") for more options.
```

```

> angler:/ # lsof -p 6233

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# lsof -p 6233
```

COMMAND     PID       USER   FD      TYPE             DEVICE  SIZE/OFF       NODE NAME
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  cwd       DIR                0,1         0          1 /
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  rtd       DIR                0,1         0          1 /
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  txt       REG             259,11     23968        399 /system/bin/app_process64
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem   unknown                                         /dev/ashmem/dalvik-main space (region space) (deleted)
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem       REG              253,0   2797568    1146914 /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot.art
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem       REG              253,0   1081344    1146915 /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot-core-libart.art
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem       REG              253,0    307200    1146916 /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot-conscrypt.art
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem       REG              253,0    225280    1146917 /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot-okhttp.art
....

> ```

Reviewer: Is it possible to make this output even shorter? And maybe add a little concise explanation at the end. What are we seeing in that output? What is important / what will we be looking for when testing the app?

##### Open Connections

> The directory `/proc/<PID>/net` provides networking information, but the information in this file is not process specific. Instead, it is the same as information as `/proc/net`. There are multiple files present in this directory, of which `tcp`, `tcp6` and `udp` can be considered important from our perspective.

Reviewer: Please take a look at this suggestion, I tried to make it a bit more concise. Apart from that I have one question: Is it really the output of cat /proc/7254/net/tcp the same as the output of cat /proc/net/tcp?
```suggestion
You can find system-wide networking information in `/proc/net` or just by inspecting the `/proc/<pid>/net` directories (for some reason not process specific). There are multiple files present in these directories, of which `tcp`, `tcp6` and `udp` might be considered relevant from the tester's perspective.
```

Author: As per the documentation of /proc, that is the case. It is counter-intuitive, but that why I get from other comments on various forums as well. 
http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/proc.5.html

```

> angler:/proc/7254/net # cat tcp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# cat /proc/7254/net/tcp
```

sl  local_address rem_address   st tx_queue rx_queue tr tm->when retrnsmt   uid  timeout inode
...
69: 1101A8C0:BB2F 9A447D4A:01BB 01 00000000:00000000 00:00000000 00000000 10093        0 75412 1 0000000000000000 20 3 19 10 -1
70: 1101A8C0:917C E3CB3AD8:01BB 01 00000000:00000000 00:00000000 00000000 10093        0 75553 1 0000000000000000 20 3 23 10 -1
71: 1101A8C0:C1E3 9C187D4A:01BB 01 00000000:00000000 00:00000000 00000000 10093        0 75458 1 0000000000000000 20 3 19 10 -1
...

> ```

Reviewer: Maybe write a concise explanation of the output. What are we seeing here? What's important to check as a tester?

> Another alternative is to use the `netstat` command, which also provides information about the network activity for the complete system in a more readable format, and can be easily filtered as per our requirements, for instance for a given pid (below output filtered for pid 24685).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another alternative is to use the `netstat` command, which also provides information about the network activity for the complete system in a more readable format, and can be easily filtered as per our requirements. For instance, we can easily filter it by PID:
```

```
angler:/ # netstat -p | grep 24685
Active Internet connections (w/o servers)
Proto Recv-Q Send-Q Local Address           Foreign Address         State       PID/Program Name
tcp        0      0 192.168.1.17:47368      172.217.194.103:https   CLOSE_WAIT  24685/com.google.android.youtube
tcp        0      0 192.168.1.17:47233      172.217.194.94:https    CLOSE_WAIT  24685/com.google.android.youtube
tcp        0      0 192.168.1.17:38480      sc-in-f100.1e100.:https ESTABLISHED 24685/com.google.android.youtube
tcp        0      0 192.168.1.17:44833      74.125.24.91:https      ESTABLISHED 24685/com.google.android.youtube
tcp        0      0 192.168.1.17:38481      sc-in-f100.1e100.:https ESTABLISHED 24685/com.google.android.youtube
...

> ```

Reviewer: Maybe write a concise explanation of the output. What are we seeing here? What's important to check as a tester?

##### Loaded Native Libraries

> File `/proc/pid/maps` contains the currently mapped memory regions and their access permissions. Using this file we can get the list of the libraries loaded in the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file `/proc/<pid>/maps` contains the currently mapped memory regions and their access permissions. Using this file we can get the list of the libraries loaded in the process.
```

```

> 127|angler:/proc/9568 # cat maps | more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# cat /proc/9568/maps
```

$ objection explore
```

#### Basic Information Gathering

> As mentioned previously, Android runs on top of a modified Linux kernel. Android retains the [*procfs*](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/filesystems/proc.txt "procfs") from Linux, and this filesystem is mounted at */proc*.  The *procfs* filesystem provides a directory-based view of process running on the system, providing information about the processes, threads, and other system-wide diagnostics. *procfs* is arguably one of the most important filesystem on Android. Many Android tools depend on *procfs* as the source of information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned previously, Android runs on top of a modified Linux kernel. Android retains the [proc filesystem](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/filesystems/proc.txt "procfs") from Linux, and this filesystem is mounted at /proc.  The proc filesystem (procfs) provides a directory-based view of process running on the system, providing information about the processes, threads, and other system-wide diagnostics. Procfs is arguably one of the most important filesystems on Android. Many Android tools depend on procfs as the source of information.
```

Bold is only used for UI navigation, see also https://github.com/OWASP/owasp-mstg/blob/master/style_guide.md#navigation

Author: My bad on this one, I wanted to make it italics.

> Many command line tools are not shipped with the Android firmware to reduce the size, but can be easily installed on a rooted device using BusyBox. We can also create our own custom scripts using commands like `cut`, `grep`, `sort` etc, to parse the *procfs* information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many command line tools are not shipped with the Android firmware to reduce the size, but can be easily installed on a rooted device using BusyBox. We can also create our own custom scripts using commands like `cut`, `grep`, `sort` etc, to parse the proc filesystem information.
```

> In this section we will be using information from *procfs* directly or indirectly to gather information about a running process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this section we will be using information from the proc filesystem directly or indirectly to gather information about a running process.
```

```
angler:/ # lsof -p 6233
COMMAND     PID       USER   FD      TYPE             DEVICE  SIZE/OFF       NODE NAME
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  cwd       DIR                0,1         0          1 /
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  rtd       DIR                0,1         0          1 /
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  txt       REG             259,11     23968        399 /system/bin/app_process64
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem   unknown                                         /dev/ashmem/dalvik-main space (region space) (deleted)
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem       REG              253,0   2797568    1146914 /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot.art
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem       REG              253,0   1081344    1146915 /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot-core-libart.art
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem       REG              253,0    307200    1146916 /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot-conscrypt.art
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem       REG              253,0    225280    1146917 /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot-okhttp.art
....
```

##### Open Connections

> Directory `/proc/pid/net` provides networking information, but the information in this file is not process specific. Instead, it is the same as information as `/proc/net`. There are multiple files present in this directory, of which `tcp`, `tcp6` and `udp` can be considered important from our perspective.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The directory `/proc/<PID>/net` provides networking information, but the information in this file is not process specific. Instead, it is the same as information as `/proc/net`. There are multiple files present in this directory, of which `tcp`, `tcp6` and `udp` can be considered important from our perspective.
```

```
angler:/proc/7254/net # cat tcp
sl  local_address rem_address   st tx_queue rx_queue tr tm->when retrnsmt   uid  timeout inode
...
69: 1101A8C0:BB2F 9A447D4A:01BB 01 00000000:00000000 00:00000000 00000000 10093        0 75412 1 0000000000000000 20 3 19 10 -1
70: 1101A8C0:917C E3CB3AD8:01BB 01 00000000:00000000 00:00000000 00000000 10093        0 75553 1 0000000000000000 20 3 23 10 -1

> 71: 1101A8C0:C1E3 9C187D4A:01BB 01 00000000:00000000 00:00000000 00000000 10093        0 75458 1 0000000000000000 20 3 19 10 -1

Reviewer 2: Please keep it to the first 2-3 lines, to reduce output.

Author: okay. I will reduce it further.

72: 1101A8C0:B4C3 8A827D4A:01BB 01 00000000:00000000 00:00000000 00000000 10093        0 77221 1 0000000000000000 20 3 27 10 -1
73: 1101A8C0:B4C2 8A827D4A:01BB 01 00000000:00000000 00:00000000 00000000 10093        0 77216 1 0000000000000000 20 3 31 10 -1
74: 1101A8C0:9B8E 93187D4A:01BB 01 00000000:00000000 00:00000000 00000000 10093        0 74656 1 0000000000000000 20 3 19 10 -1
75: 1101A8C0:B4C1 8A827D4A:01BB 01 00000000:00000000 00:00000000 00000000 10093        0 74262 1 0000000000000000 20 3 31 10 -1
...
```

> Another alternative is to use `netstat` command, which also provides information about the network activity for the complete system in a more readable format, and can be easily filtered as per our requirements, for instance for a given pid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another alternative is to use the `netstat` command, which also provides information about the network activity for the complete system in a more readable format, and can be easily filtered as per our requirements, for instance for a given pid.
```

```

> angler:/ # netstat

Reviewer 2: Can you give the example with a PID that you are filtering, as mentioned above?

Author: sure. I have updated the example.

...
```

##### Loaded Native Libraries

File `/proc/pid/maps` contains the currently mapped memory regions and their access permissions. Using this file we can get the list of the libraries loaded in the process.

```
127|angler:/proc/9568 # cat maps | more
12c00000-52c00000 rw-p 00000000 00:04 20927                              /dev/ashmem/dalvik-main space (region space) (deleted)
6f019000-6f2c0000 rw-p 00000000 fd:00 1146914                            /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot.art
6f2c0000-6f3c6000 rw-p 00000000 fd:00 1146915                            /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot-core-libart.art
...
78bd50a000-78bd51e000 r-xp 00000000 103:0b 2144                          /system/lib64/libz.so
78bd51e000-78bd51f000 ---p 00000000 00:00 0
78bd51f000-78bd520000 r--p 00014000 103:0b 2144                          /system/lib64/libz.so
78bd520000-78bd521000 rw-p 00015000 103:0b 2144                          /system/lib64/libz.so

8bd567000-78bd56a000 r-xp 00000000 103:0b 2023                          /system/lib64/libnativebridge.so
...
```

##### Sandbox Inspection

> The application data is stored in a sandboxed directory present at `/data/data/<app name>`. The contents of this directory has already been discussed in detail in "[Accessing App Data Directories](0x05b-basic-security_testing#accessing-app-data-directories "Accessing App Data Directories")" section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The application data is stored in a sandboxed directory present at `/data/data/<package name>`. The content of this directory has already been discussed in detail in the "[Accessing App Data Directories](0x05b-basic-security_testing#accessing-app-data-directories "Accessing App Data Directories")" section.
```

##### Open Files

You can use `lsof` with the flag `-p <pid>` to return the list of open files for the specified process. See the [man page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/lsof.8.html "Man Page of lsof") for more options.

```
# lsof -p 6233
COMMAND     PID       USER   FD      TYPE             DEVICE  SIZE/OFF       NODE NAME
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  cwd       DIR                0,1         0          1 /
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  rtd       DIR                0,1         0          1 /
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  txt       REG             259,11     23968        399 /system/bin/app_process64
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem   unknown                                         /dev/ashmem/dalvik-main space (region space) (deleted)
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem       REG              253,0   2797568    1146914 /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot.art
.foobar.c  6233     u0_a97  mem       REG              253,0   1081344    1146915 /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot-core-libart.art
...
```

In the above output, the most relevant fields for us are:
- `NAME`: path of the file
- `TYPE`: type of the file, example, file is a directory or a regular file

> This can be extremely useful in getting list of uncommon files used while dealing with applications using obfuscation, or other anti-reverse engineering techniques. For instance, an application performing encryption-decryption of data and storing it in a file temporarily.

Reviewer: What do you think about this?
```suggestion
This can be extremely useful to spot unusual files when monitoring applications using obfuscation or other anti-reverse engineering techniques, without having to reverse the code. For instance, an application might be performing encryption-decryption of data and storing it in a file temporarily.
```

Author: This is nice!! :)

```
angler:/ # netstat -p | grep 24685
Active Internet connections (w/o servers)
Proto Recv-Q Send-Q Local Address           Foreign Address         State       PID/Program Name
tcp        0      0 192.168.1.17:47368      172.217.194.103:https   CLOSE_WAIT  24685/com.google.android.youtube
tcp        0      0 192.168.1.17:47233      172.217.194.94:https    CLOSE_WAIT  24685/com.google.android.youtube
tcp        0      0 192.168.1.17:38480      sc-in-f100.1e100.:https ESTABLISHED 24685/com.google.android.youtube
tcp        0      0 192.168.1.17:44833      74.125.24.91:https      ESTABLISHED 24685/com.google.android.youtube
tcp        0      0 192.168.1.17:38481      sc-in-f100.1e100.:https ESTABLISHED 24685/com.google.android.youtube
...
```

`netstat` output is clearly more user friendly than reading `/proc/<pid>/net`. The most relevant fields for us, similar to the previous output, are following:
- `Foreign Address`: remote address and port number pair (port number can be replaced with the well-known name of a protocol associated with the port).
- `Recv-Q` and `Send-Q`: Statistics related to receive and send queue. Gives an indication on how actively the connection is being used.

> - `State`: the state of a socket, example, if the socket is in active use (`ESTABLISHED`) or closed (`CLOSED`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `State`: the state of a socket, for example, if the socket is in active use (`ESTABLISHED`) or closed (`CLOSED`).
```

##### Loaded Native Libraries

> The file `/proc/<pid>/maps` contains the currently mapped memory regions and their access permissions. Using this file we can get the list of the libraries loaded in the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file `/proc/<pid>/maps` contains the currently mapped memory regions and their access permissions. Using this file we can get the list of the libraries loaded by the process itself (which will normally appear under `/data/app/<app_package_name>/lib/<architecture>/`).
```

Reviewer: unfortunately the example does not reflect this, could you please replace some of the lines with at least one library `/data/app/<app_package_name>/lib/<architecture>/`?

Author: Updated the example.

```
# cat /proc/9568/maps
12c00000-52c00000 rw-p 00000000 00:04 20927                              /dev/ashmem/dalvik-main space (region space) (deleted)
6f019000-6f2c0000 rw-p 00000000 fd:00 1146914                            /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot.art
6f2c0000-6f3c6000 rw-p 00000000 fd:00 1146915                            /data/dalvik-cache/arm64/system@framework@boot-core-libart.art
...
78bd50a000-78bd51e000 r-xp 00000000 103:0b 2144                          /system/lib64/libz.so
78bd51e000-78bd51f000 ---p 00000000 00:00 0
78bd51f000-78bd520000 r--p 00014000 103:0b 2144                          /system/lib64/libz.so
78bd520000-78bd521000 rw-p 00015000 103:0b 2144                          /system/lib64/libz.so

8bd567000-78bd56a000 r-xp 00000000 103:0b 2023                          /system/lib64/libnativebridge.so
...
```

##### Sandbox Inspection

> The application data is stored in a sandboxed directory present at `/data/data/<package name>`. The content of this directory has already been discussed in detail in the "[Accessing App Data Directories](0x05b-basic-security_testing#accessing-app-data-directories "Accessing App Data Directories")" section.

Reviewer: For consistency
```suggestion
The application data is stored in a sandboxed directory present at `/data/data/<app_package_name>`. The content of this directory has already been discussed in detail in the "[Accessing App Data Directories](0x05b-basic-security_testing#accessing-app-data-directories "Accessing App Data Directories")" section.
```
